The PhiloLogic load process takes a number of TEI-encoded texts,
processes them, and creates a directory tree that we call the database
image or the system_dir.  We've written a command-line loader that
should handle this, and more, for you, but it's fairly new and so
probably immature, so you may find problems with it.  But this is how
you use it:

- cd to the directory that holds the texts you wish to load.
- run a command like
	philoload mydatabase *.xml

"mydatabase" is the database name; it must be composed of only the
letters A-Za-z and the numerals 0-9, but otherwise it can be whatever
you want it to be.  It must always be the first argument to philoload.

*.xml is a shell glob pattern that tells the system to load all the
files in the directory whose names end in ".xml".  This glob expansion
is handled by the shell and it should appear to philoload as though
you listed the files as:
	philoload mydatabase file1.xml anotherfile.xml file3.xml file?.xml

It should also work to say "*.xml *.sgml" though I haven't tried it
myself.

philoload takes additional arguments that you may see by running it
with no arguments:

philoload databasename [ --texts=/path/to/texts] [ --filelist=files2load.txt ] 
	[ --image=/where/to/put/IMAGE/] [ --loader=/path/to/textloader ] 
	[ --mkbibliography=/path/to/extractor ] --delete --loadsql 
	--sqluser=notme files1.xml file2.sgml file3*

loader and mkbibliography would be local versions/modifications of
xml-sgmlloader.pl and newextract.pl that you wanted to use instead of
those, but if you're just downloading and testing you probably won't
be interested in that for some time.  --loadsql loads the
bibliographic metadata into a MySQL database, and --delete deletes
pre-existing database images if you know you want to replace them
(instead of giving them a different name).

If the loader says the load was successful, point your browser to
http://yourserver/philologic/philosearch.html (or wherever you put
philosearch with ./configure --with-web-url=/elsewhere), enter your
databasename where it says "ENTER SOMETHING" and run a search.

If your load fails and you can't figure it out, write to
support@philologic.uchicago.edu and include (preferably gzipped)
/var/philologic/work/LOADER.LOG

